Agentic Medical Knowledge Graphs Enhance Medical Question Answering:
Bridging the Gap Between LLMs and Evolving Medical Knowledge
Mohammad R. Rezaei1,2∗ , Reza Saadati Fard3 ,Jayson L. Parker1 , Rahul G. Krishnan1,2 , Milad Lankarany1
1
University of Toronto
2
Vector Institute
3
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
*
mr.rezaei@mail.utoronto.ca

arXiv:2502.13010v3 [cs.CL] 29 Jun 2025

Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have greatly
advanced medical Question Answering (QA)
by leveraging vast clinical data and medical
literature. However, the rapid evolution of
medical knowledge and the labor-intensive process of manually updating domain-specific resources can undermine the reliability of these
systems. We address this challenge with
Agentic Medical Graph-RAG (AMG-RAG),
a comprehensive framework that automates
the construction and continuous updating of
Medical Knowledge Graphs (MKGs), integrates reasoning, and retrieves current external evidence from the MKGs for medical
QA. Evaluations on the MEDQA and MEDMCQA benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of AMG-RAG, achieving an F1 score of
74.1% on MEDQA and an accuracy of 66.34%
on MEDMCQA—surpassing both comparable
models and those 10 to 100 times larger. By
dynamically linking new findings and complex medical concepts, AMG-RAG not only
boosts accuracy but also enhances interpretability for medical queries, which has a critical
impact on delivering up-to-date, trustworthy
medical insights (GitHub: https://github.
com/MrRezaeiUofT/AMG-RAG).

1

Figure 1: Performance versus parameter count on the MEDQA
and MEDMCQA benchmarks. Our system, Agentic Medical Graph-RAG (AMG-RAG), attains an F1 of 74.1 % on
MEDQA and an accuracy of 66.34 % on MEDMCQA, outperforming models that contain 10–100× more parameters. See
Tables 1 and 2 for details.

Introduction

the intricate relationships among medical entities.
Knowledge Graph (KG) provide a structured and
interconnected view that supports nuanced reasoning (Huang et al., 2021), yet creating and maintaining them by hand is costly—especially in medicine,
where new insights rapidly invalidate older facts
(Yang et al., 2024).
We introduce an automated framework that constructs and continuously refines Medical Knowledge Graphs (MKGs) for QA. Our LLM-driven
agents, assisted by domain-specific search tools,
generate graph entities enriched with metadata,
confidence scores, and relevance indicators. This
automation sharply reduces manual curation while

Medical knowledge is growing at an unprecedented
rate: every day brings new research findings, revised clinical guidelines, and updated treatment
protocols. Recent work shows that Large Language Models (LLMs) can already harness this
ever-expanding corpus for medical Question Answering (QA) (Nazi and Peng, 2024; Liu et al.,
2023).
Despite their promise, LLMs face two persistent challenges. First, they must remain factually
current in a field where knowledge can become
obsolete almost overnight (Rohanian et al., 2024;
Yu et al., 2024). Second, they must correctly model
1

keeping the graph aligned with the latest discoveries. In contrast to Retrieval Augmented Generation
(RAG) systems that rely solely on vector similarity (Lewis et al., 2020), our graph-centric retrieval
leverages explicit relationships to synthesise information across domains such as drug interactions,
clinical trials, patient histories, and guidelines.
The AMG-RAG combines dynamically synthesised MKG with multi-step reasoning, guided by
confidence scores and adaptive traversal strategies (Trivedi et al., 2022). This design yields
more accurate and complete answers without incurring additional fine-tuning or inference costs. On
the MEDQA and MEDMCQA benchmarks—both
of which test evidence retrieval, complex reasoning, and multiple-choice comprehension—AMGRAG achieves an F1 of 74.1% and an accuracy
of 66.34%, respectively (Fig. 1). These results
surpass those of similarly sized RAG approaches
and even much larger state-of-the-art models, underscoring the benefits of a dynamically evolving
MKG for medical QA. Our findings highlight the
potential of automated, relationally enriched knowledge retrieval to enhance clinical decision-making
by delivering timely and trustworthy insights (Zhou
et al., 2023).

and MedPaLM (Singhal et al., 2023) adapt transformer pre-training to biomedical corpora, delivering strong gains on entity recognition, relation
extraction, and multiple-choice QA (Nazi and Peng,
2024; Liu et al., 2023). Yet, even these specialised
models struggle to synthesise multi-hop relations
(e.g. rare comorbidities or drug–gene interactions)
and must be re-trained to absorb new discoveries
(Rohanian et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2024).
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG).
RAG pipelines couple an LLM with an external evidence retriever, injecting fresh context at inference
time (Lewis et al., 2020). Vendi-RAG (Rezaei and
Dieng, 2025) and MMED-RAG(Xia et al., 2024)
extend this idea to biomedical and multimodal
sources, respectively. Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
prompting further boosts reasoning: IRCoT
(Trivedi et al., 2022) interleaves iterative retrieval
with step-wise justification. Gemini’s long-context
model recently pushed MedQA scores beyond
GPT-4 (Saab et al., 2024). Nevertheless, most
RAG systems rely on static vector stores and
cannot explain answers in terms of explicit
biomedical relations.
Knowledge-graph reasoning. KG-Rank (Huang
et al., 2021) and related work such as KGRAG(Sanmartin, 2024) harness ontologies to
re-rank evidence or enforce logical constraints,
improving factual consistency in long-form QA
(Yang et al., 2024). However, constructing and curating a high-coverage, up-to-date MKG remains
labour-intensive, limiting scalability and freshness.

Contributions. Our contributions are threefold:
1. We developed a autonomous search and graphbuilding process powered by specialized LLM
agents that continuously generate and refine
MKGs through integrated workflows using
search engines and medical textbooks.
2. Our system embeds confidence scoring mechanisms that explicitly model information uncertainty, providing transparent reliability assessments for medical information.

3

We propose our framework, Agentic Medical
Graph-RAG (AMG-RAG), bridges these threads
by dynamically generating a confidence-scored
Medical Knowledge Graph (MKG) that is tightly
coupled to a Retrieval Augmented Generation
(RAG)+CoT pipeline. AMG-RAG features autonomous Knowledge Graph (KG) evolution
through Large Language Model (LLM) agents extracting entities and relations from live sources with
provenance tracking; graph-conditioned retrieval
that maps queries onto the MKG to guide evidence
selection; and reasoning over structured context
where the answer generator utilizes both textual
passages and traversed sub-graphs for transparent,
multi-hop reasoning.

3. We created an adaptive graph traversal system
that transcends traditional retrieval methods,
enabling dynamic contextualization of medical knowledge.

2

Method

Related Work

Medical QA has progressed through three complementary lines of research: (i) domain-specific language models, (ii) retrieval-augmented generation,
and (iii) knowledge-graph reasoning.
Domain-specific language models. BioBERT
(Lee et al., 2020), PubMedBERT (Gu et al., 2021),
2

3.1

Algorithm 1 KG-Based QA Inference Pipeline

Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)

Require: Query q, Knowledge Graph KG, Confidence
Threshold τ , Max Iterations N
Ensure: Final Answer â with Confidence s
1: Extract medical terms:
{n1 , n2 , . . . , nm }
←
ExtractTerms(q)
2: Initialize reasoning traces: C ← ∅
3: Initialize confidence: si ← 1.0 for all terms ni
4: for i = 1 to m do
▷ Iterate over extracted terms
5:
Explore KG: Retrieve relevant nodes {dj } and relationships rij for ni
6:
for each child node nj of ni in KG do
7:
Compute child confidence: sj ← si · rij
8:
if sj ≥ τ then
9:
Include nj in exploration set
10:
end if
11:
end for
12:
Generate Reasoning Trace: ci ← LLM(ni , {dj })
13:
Add ci to reasoning traces: C ← C ∪ {ci }
14: end for
15: Synthesize Answer: â, ŝ ← G(C)
16: return â, ŝ
▷ Return final answer with confidence

RAG is a framework designed to enhance Question
Answering (QA) by integrating relevant external
knowledge into the generation process.In the RAG
approach, the retriever fetches a fixed number of
relevant documents, {d1 , d2 , . . . , dn } ∈ D, based
on the query q. Here, D represents the set of all
domain-specific documents utilized. These documents are concatenated and passed directly to a
LLM-based text generator, G, which produces the
answer â:
â = G(q, {d1 , . . . , dn }).
This approach is simple and computationally efficient but may struggle with domain-specific or
complex queries that require additional supporting
evidence.

3.2
RAG with Chain-of-Thought (CoT). Enhancing RAG’s performance can be achieved by integrating intermediate reasoning steps prior to producing the final response. The generator produces
a chain of thought, c, which serves as an explicit
reasoning trace:

In scenarios requiring domain expertise, such as
medical or scientific QA, traditional methods often fail due to their inability to capture intricate
domain-specific relationships or handle ambiguous
queries. KG-driven approaches overcome these
challenges by integrating explicit relationships and
structured knowledge representations. This marks
a significant advancement in intelligent QA systems, ensuring robustness and scalability across
various applications.
The suggested AMG-RAG framework dynamically creates a MKG and incorporates sophisticated
reasoning abilities, overcoming the shortcomings
of traditional methods. Our system utilizes structured medical knowledge and reasoning, ensuring
flexibility to accommodate new data.
The AMG-RAG pipeline begins with question
parsing, where an LLM agent extracts medical
terms {n1 , n2 , . . . , nm } from the user query q:

{d1 , . . . , dk } = Retriever(q; D),
c = G(q, {d1 , . . . , dk }),

Medical QA with AMG-RAG

â = G(c).

This step-by-step approach enhances reasoning and
interpretability, leading to improved accuracy in
multi-hop reasoning tasks.
RAG with Search. The RAGs’s performance can
improved further by incorporating additional related documents retrieved from external sources,
such as the internet, through a search tool. This
variant integrates external search capabilities into
the retrieval process. For a query q, the retriever’s
results are combined with those from external
search engines, providing more comprehensive evidence for the LLM to generate a response:

{n1 , n2 , . . . , nm } = LLM(q, M ),

m ≤ M.

During node exploration, the system queries the
KG for each term ni , applying a confidence threshold that filters relationships based on their reliability scores. The system propagates confidence
through the KG by computing child confidence as:

{d′1 , . . . , d′m } = Search(q; D′ ),
â = G(q, {d1 , . . . , dn , d′1 , . . . , d′m }).

s(nj ) = s(ni ) · s(rij ),

This additional search step significantly enhances
performance, particularly in scenarios that require
access to extensive and diverse knowledge.

∀j ∈ children of i.

Our framework supports both breadth-first and
depth-first exploration strategies, enabling flexible
knowledge traversal based on query characteristics.
3

Figure 2: Model Schema. A) The pipeline for creating the MKG using search tools and an LLM agent. B) An example of the
generated MKG in Neo4J, illustrating nodes and relationships derived from search results and contextual information. Our model
successfully retrieved and utilized recent knowledge to accurately answer a medical question, highlighting the practical benefit
of continuously updating the knowledge graph. Furthermore, we extended this evaluation by providing additional examples
retrieved by our system using recent publications in Table 11. C) The AMG-RAG pipeline. D) A simplified RAG pipeline.

The exploration continues until either cumulative
confidence meets threshold τ or document limit
M is reached, ensuring comprehensive yet focused
information gathering.
The chain-of-thought generation phase synthesizes reasoning traces ci for each entity by integrating information from connected nodes:

of dynamically synthesized knowledge representations. Unlike traditional static knowledge bases,
our method allows the graph structure to adapt
continuously in response to new queries and the
evidence they uncover. Furthermore, it assigns a
confidence score to each edge in the graph, indicating the reliability of each relationship, which is
crucial given the uncertainty inherent in medical
evidence.

ci = LLM(ni , {d(nj ) | j ∈ connected nodes}).
Finally, answer synthesis aggregates these reasoning traces to produce the final output â with an
associated confidence score:

Node Extraction. Our Medical Entity Recognizer (MER) agent identifies domain-specific terms
within user queries, establishing them as foundational nodes {n1 , n2 , . . . , nm } in the knowledge
graph. For each identified entity, specialized medical search tools retrieve contextual descriptions
d(ni ):

â, ŝ = G({c1 , c2 , . . . , cm }).
This approach ensures that answers are comprehensive, interpretable, and anchored in reliable medical
knowledge.
3.3

d(ni ) = Search(ni ; knowledge source).
These descriptions provide rich semantic context
for the knowledge graph, ensuring accurate representation of medical concepts and their attributes.

Dynamic Generation of the Medical
Knowledge Graph

The development of the MKG marks a pivotal
advancement within our AMG-RAG framework,
facilitating organized reasoning through the use

Relationship Inference. The power of our approach lies in its ability to dynamically infer rela4

tionships between medical entities. An LLM agent
analyzes pairs of nodes (ni , nj ) to determine potential relationships rij and quantify their reliability:

This study employed the MEDQA and MedMCQA datasets to benchmark and evaluate medical
QA systems. These datasets serve as challenging
testbeds for open-domain QA tasks due to their demands for multi-hop reasoning and the integration
of domain-specific knowledge. The relevance of
MEDQA in the real world, together with the diverse question styles and extensive development
set of MedMCQA make them ideal for advancing
the development of robust QA models capable of
addressing medical inquiries. We utilize GPT-4omini as the backbone of the implementation for
both MKG and AMG-RAG, leveraging its capabilities with approximately ∼ 8B parameters. This
model serves as the core component, enabling advanced reasoning, RAG, and structured knowledge
integration.

rij , sij = LLM(d(ni ), d(nj )).
This process generates not just connection types
(e.g., causation, correlation, contraindication) but
also confidence scores that propagate through
subsequent reasoning steps, enabling evidenceweighted inference.
Knowledge Graph Construction. The resulting
MKG integrates extracted entities, their descriptions, inferred relationships, and confidence metrics into a cohesive structure. This graph serves as
both a repository of medical knowledge and a computational framework for reasoning. By attaching
reliability scores to every edge, downstream components can appropriately weight evidence during
inference, enhancing both accuracy and explainability. The graph’s dynamic nature allows it to
continuously incorporate new information and refine existing connections, addressing the staleness
issues that plague traditional knowledge-based systems.

4

4.1

Medical Knowledge Graph

To address the challenges of inaccurate knowledge
updating—such as those stemming from noisy retrieval results or LLM hallucinations—our AMGRAG introduces a robust and dynamic approach to
MKG construction. This is particularly critical in
healthcare applications, where the absence of error
detection and correction mechanisms in automated
KG generation can compromise system reliability.
The dynamic update mechanism encompasses
strategies resilient to errors, defined by the confidence level of the medical information retained
within the MKG and among nodes i and j, denoted
as sij . This approach facilitates monitoring and
reduces the spread of erroneous information during the refinement or reasoning stages. These protective measures allow the system to identify and
rectify inconsistencies that may arise from external
retrieved information.
The MKG is dynamically constructed for each
question by integrating search items, contextual
information, and relationships extracted from
medical textbooks and search tools, including
Wikipedia (Wiki-MKG) and PubMed (PubMedMKG) queries. The ablation in Table 3 demonstrates that the created MKG based on PubMed
(PubMed-MKG) is more effective in enhancing the
performance of the AMG-RAG. This data is processed and structured within a Neo4j database. Key
innovations in the knowledge graph include:

Experiments

The MEDQA dataset is a free-form, multiplechoice open-domain QA dataset specifically designed for medical QA. Derived from professional
medical board exams, this dataset presents a significant challenge as it requires both the retrieval
of relevant evidence and sophisticated reasoning
to answer questions accurately. Each question is
accompanied by multiple-choice answers that demand a deep understanding of medical concepts
and logical inference, often relying on evidence
found in medical textbooks. For this study, the
test partition of the MEDQA dataset, comprising
approximately 1,200 samples, was used (Jin et al.,
2021).
The MedMCQA dataset is another multiplechoice question-answering dataset tailored for medical QA. Unlike MEDQA, which is derived from
board exam questions, MedMCQA offers a broader
variety of question types, encompassing both foundational and clinical knowledge across diverse medical specialties. In this study, the MedMCQA development set, containing approximately 4,000 questions, was used to benchmark against other models
(Pal et al., 2022a).

1. Dynamic Node and Relationship Creation:
Nodes are instantiated based on retrieved entities and search terms, while relationships are
5

constructed using predefined semantic templates aligned with medical ontologies.

or WikiSearch. This approach significantly reduces latency during question answering since the
system frequently retrieves information from the
pre-populated MKG rather than performing new
searches. By maintaining an updated MKG, AMGRAG achieves a balanced minimum dependency
on computational resources and search tools during
the test phase.
Despite having only 8B parameters, it delivers
competitive results compared to much larger models like Med-Gemini (1800B) and GPT-4 (1760B).
Even in worst-case scenarios where relevant information is absent from the MKG, the additional
search cost is still significantly lower than the resource requirements of much larger models.

2. Bidirectional Relationships: The graph includes both forward and reverse relationships
between nodes to allow flexible traversal and
comprehensive context understanding.
3. Confidence-Based Relevance Scoring: Each
relationship is enriched with textual annotations and a quantitative confidence score
that measures the reliability of the connection. This confidence score enables the system
to down-rank or filter out uncertain associations, thereby mitigating the effects of noisy
retrievals.

4.2

4. Summarization with Reliability Indicators:
Each search item is paired with a concise summary derived from contextual sources. These
summaries are accompanied by confidence
scores that indicate their trustworthiness, allowing nuanced uncertainty modeling.

Performance Comparison

Table 1 presents a comprehensive comparison of
state-of-the-art language models on the MEDQA
benchmark. The results highlight the critical role of
advanced reasoning strategies in achieving higher
performance, such as CoT reasoning and the integration of search tools. While larger models like
Med-Gemini and GPT-4 achieve the highest accuracy and F1 scores, their performance comes
at the cost of significantly larger parameter sizes.
These models exemplify the power of scaling combined with sophisticated reasoning and retrieval
techniques.
Significantly, AMG-RAG, despite having just 8
billion parameters, attains an F1 score of 74.1%
on the MEDQA benchmark, surpassing models
like Meditron, which possess 70 billion parameters without needing any fine tuning. This highlights AMG-RAG’s exceptional efficiency and proficiency in utilizing CoT reasoning and external
evidence retrieval. The model leverages tools such
as PubMedSearch and WikiSearch to dynamically
integrate domain-specific knowledge dynamically,
thereby improving its ability to address medical
questions. Examples of QA interactions, including
detailed search items and reasoning for question
samples, are provided in Appendix C. These examples are organized in Tables 7, 8, 9, and 10, drawn
from the MEDQA benchmark.
On the MedMCQA benchmark, as shown in Table 2, AMG-RAG achieves an accuracy of 66.34%,
even outperforming larger models like Meditron70B and better than Codex 5-shot CoT. This result
underscores AMG-RAG’s adaptability and robustness, demonstrating that it can deliver competitive
performance even against significantly larger mod-

5. Thresholding for Quality Control: In our
experiments, we applied a confidence threshold of 8 (on a 10-point scale) to retain only
high-reliability nodes and edges. This value
was empirically found to yield the best results
in benchmark performance.
6. Integration with Neo4j: The complete graph
is stored in a Neo4j database, leveraging its
powerful graph query engine for efficient retrieval and analysis during inference.
A partial visualization of the MKG structure is
shown in Figure 2.B. Additional complete examples with retrieved papers are provided in Table 11.
This MKG forms the core knowledge source for
the AMG-RAG inference pipeline.
As discussed in Appendix B, extensive validation was conducted through both human and machine evaluators. Clinical experts verified the correctness of the knowledge graph, and expert LLMs
such as GPT-4 achieved high accuracy (e.g., 9/10)
in validating the extracted knowledge. These results underscore the MKG’s ability to support reliable and explainable medical reasoning within
AMG-RAG.
The knowledge graph creation process in AMGRAG operates independently from the QA process,
allowing for continuous background updates of
the MKG via search tools such as PubMedSearch
6

Model

Model Size

Acc. (%)

F1 (%)

Fine-Tuned

Uses CoT

Uses Search

Med-Gemini (Saab et al., 2024)
GPT-4 (Nori et al., 2023)
Med-PaLM 2 (Singhal et al., 2025)
Med-PaLM 2 (5-shot)
AMG-RAG
Meerkat(Kim et al., 2024)
Meditron (Chen et al., 2023)
Flan-PaLM (Singhal et al., 2023)
LLAMA-2 (Chen et al., 2023)
Shakti-LLM (Shakhadri et al., 2024)
Codex 5-shot CoT (Liévin et al., 2024)
BioMedGPT (Luo et al., 2023)
BioLinkBERT (base) (Singhal et al., 2023)

∼1800B
∼1760B
∼340B
∼340B
∼8B
7B
70B
540B
70B
2.5B
–
10B
–

91.1
90.2
85.4
79.7
73.9
74.3
70.2
67.6
61.5
60.3
60.2
50.4
40.0

89.5
88.7
82.1
75.3
74.1
70.4
68.3
65.0
60.2
58.9
57.7
48.7
38.4

✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗

✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
✗

Table 1: Comparison of LLM models on the MEDQA Benchmark. Additional comparison with RAGs are provided
in Table B

els. Its ability to maintain high accuracy on diverse
datasets further highlights the effectiveness of its
design, which combines CoT reasoning with structured knowledge graph integration and retrieval
mechanisms.
Model
AMG-RAG
Meditron (Chen et al., 2023)
Codex 5-shot (Liévin et al., 2024)
VOD (Liévin et al., 2023)
Flan-PaLM (Singhal et al., 2022)
PaLM
GAL
PubmedBERT (Gu et al., 2021)
SciBERT (Pal et al., 2022b)
BioBERT (Lee et al., 2020)
BERT (Devlin, 2018)

Model Size

Acc. (%)

∼8B
70B
–
–
540B
540B
120B
–
–
–
–

66.34
66.0
59.7
58.3
57.6
54.5
52.9
40.0
39.0
38.0
35.0

Table 2: Comparison of Models on the MedMCQA.

Overall, AMG-RAG’s results on MEDQA and
MedMCQA benchmarks solidify its position as a
highly efficient and effective model for medical
QA. By leveraging reasoning, dynamically generated MKG, and external knowledge sources, AMGRAG not only closes the gap with much larger models but also sets a new standard for performance
among smaller-sized models.

Figure 3: Confusion matrix for AMG-RAG with and without CoT and Knowledge Graph integration on the MEDQA
dataset.

outperforms Wiki-MKG, likely due to its focused,
domain-specific content that aligns closely with the
specialized nature of medical QA tasks.

Impact of Search Tools on MKG creation and
CoT Reasoning on AMG-RAG Performance.
Figure 3 and Table 3 demonstrate the effect of
integrating different search tools for creating the
MKG on the performance of the AMG-RAG system applied to the MEDQA benchmark. Incorporating these external retrieval capabilities significantly enhances both accuracy and F1 scores, as
they allow the model to access relevant and upto-date evidence critical for answering complex
medical questions. Among the two search tools
for creating the MKG, PubMed-MKG consistently

In addition to the integration of the dynamical
MKG, the reasoning module plays a pivotal role
in performance. As highlighted in Figure 3, ablating either CoT or MKG integration causes a
considerable degradation in accuracy and F1 score.
This demonstrates that structured multi-hop reasoning and medical knowledge grounding through the
MKG are indispensable for the system’s ability to
deliver accurate and evidence-based answers."
7

Comparison Against Traditional RAG Models.
Table 3 presents a comprehensive comparison of
various RAG models evaluated on the MEDQA
benchmark. This includes models with different
retrieval mechanisms and model sizes, enabling a
head-to-head evaluation of AMG-RAG with other
state-of-the-art baselines such as Self-RAG (Asai
et al., 2023), HyDE (Gao et al., 2022), GraphRAG
(Edge et al., 2024), and MedRAG (Zhao et al.,
2025). The results clearly show that AMG-RAG
configured with the PubMed-MKG and an 8B LLM
backbone achieves the highest accuracy of 73.92%,
surpassing all competing models. Notably, ablation
results indicate that removing search functionality
or CoT reasoning significantly degrades accuracy
(dropping to 67.16% and 66.69%, respectively),
confirming the essential role of structured retrieval
and reasoning components in complex question
answering. Other baseline models such as Geminipro and PMC-LLaMA demonstrate weaker performance, further validating the efficacy of domainaware retrieval and reasoning modules proposed
in AMG-RAG. Importantly, the domain specificity
and freshness of PubMedSearch provide a significant advantage in retrieving relevant knowledge
that general-purpose search modules often fail to
deliver.

Figure 4: Performance comparison across different question
domains in the Neurology and Genetics fields.

when using the same retrieval pipeline. These results reinforce the importance of synergy between
the language model and the retrieval mechanism.
Larger models do not necessarily guarantee higher
accuracy—domain alignment and reasoning ability,
such as that of GPT4o-mini, are crucial for success
on high-stakes tasks like medical QA.
Model
GPT4o-mini
LLaMA 3.1
Mixtral
GPT 3.5

Model
AMG-RAG

Self-RAG
RAG
GraphRAG
MedRag
PMC-LLaMA

Size
PubMed-MKG-8B
Wiki-MKG-8B
No-MK-8B
No-MKG & CoT-8B
8B
HyDE-8B
Gemini-pro
70B
8B
Gemini-pro
70B
8B
70B
13B
13B

Accuracy (%)
73.92
70.62
67.16
66.69
67.32
68.32
64.5
56.2
64.3
65.1
55.1
64.8
49.57
42.58
44.38

Config-Size
PubMed-MKG-8B
No-MKG & CoT-8B
PubMed-MKG-8B
No-MKG-8B
PubMed-MKG-8×7B
No-MKG-8×7B
PubMed-MKG
No-MKG

Accuracy (%)
73.92
66.69
66.5
62.6
61.4
53.2
65.2
58.4

Table 4: AMG-RAG performance across different LLM
backbones on the MEDQA benchmark.

Improving QA in Rapidly Changing Medical Domains with AMG-RAG. Figure 4 shows AMGRAG’s superior performance in rapidly evolving
subfields like Neurology and Genetics. This advantage stems from real-time PubMed integration
during inference, combined with structured reasoning and knowledge graph grounding, enabling
precise answers to complex medical questions with
enhanced interpretability and trustworthiness.

Table 3: Comparison of MEDQA accuracy across various RAG models and retrieval strategies.

5
Comparison Against LLM Backbones. In addition to evaluating different retrieval strategies,
we assess how the choice of LLM backbone influences performance in Table 4. This comparison highlights that AMG-RAG built on GPT4omini with PubMed-MKG achieves the best performance (73.92%). In contrast, performance declines
when switching to LLaMA 3.1 or Mixtral, even

Conclusion

We introduce AMG-RAG, an advanced QA system
that dynamically constructs MKG while integrating
sophisticated structured reasoning for medical QA.
The system demonstrates significant improvements
in accuracy and reasoning capabilities, particularly
for medical question-answering tasks, outperforming other approaches of similar model size or 10 to
100 times larger.
8

6

Limitations

Jacob Devlin. 2018. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805.

Despite AMG-RAG’s advancements, our approach
has certain limitations. Firstly, it relies on external search tools which introduce latency during the
creation of the MKG. However, this occurs only
once, when the MKG is built from scratch for the
first time. Additionally, while the system performs
exceptionally well in medical domains, its applicability to non-medical tasks remains unexplored.
Another limitation is the need for structured, authoritative sources of medical knowledge. Currently, AMG-RAG retrieves information from diverse sources, including research articles and medical textbooks. However, as emphasized in clinical
decision-making, treatment guidelines serve as essential references for standardized diagnosis and
treatment protocols (Hager et al., 2024). Future
work on AMG-RAG should focus on integrating
structured access to these sources to ensure compliance with evidence-based medicine.

7

Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua
Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt,
Dasha Metropolitansky, Robert Osazuwa Ness, and
Jonathan Larson. 2024. From local to global: A
graph rag approach to query-focused summarization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130.
Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie
Callan. 2022. Precise zero-shot dense retrieval
without relevance labels, 2022. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2212.10496.
Yu Gu, Robert Tinn, Hao Cheng, Michael Lucas, Naoto
Usuyama, Xiaodong Liu, Tristan Naumann, Jianfeng
Gao, and Hoifung Poon. 2021. Domain-specific language model pretraining for biomedical natural language processing. ACM Transactions on Computing
for Healthcare (HEALTH), 3(1):1–23.
Paul Hager, Friederike Jungmann, Robbie Holland, Kunal Bhagat, Inga Hubrecht, Manuel Knauer, Jakob
Vielhauer, Marcus Makowski, Rickmer Braren, Georgios Kaissis, et al. 2024. Evaluation and mitigation
of the limitations of large language models in clinical decision-making. Nature medicine, 30(9):2613–
2622.

Ethics Statement

The development of LLMs for medical QA requires
careful ethical consideration due to risks of inaccuracy and bias. Ensuring the reliability of retrieved
content is crucial, especially when integrating external knowledge sources. To mitigate these risks,
we implement a confidence scoring mechanism
into the MKG to validate the information. However, bias detection and mitigation remain active
research areas.

Hongcheng Huang and Ziyu Dong. 2013. Research
on architecture and query performance based on distributed graph database neo4j. In 2013 3rd International Conference on Consumer Electronics, Communications and Networks, pages 533–536. IEEE.
Xiaofeng Huang, Jixin Zhang, Zisang Xu, Lu Ou, and
Jianbin Tong. 2021. A knowledge graph based question answering method for medical domain. PeerJ
Computer Science, 7:e667.
Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng,
Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. 2021. What disease
does this patient have? a large-scale open domain
question answering dataset from medical exams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421.

Acknowledgements
References
Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and
Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-rag: Learning to
retrieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.

Hyunjae Kim, Hyeon Hwang, Jiwoo Lee, Sihyeon
Park, Dain Kim, Taewhoo Lee, Chanwoong Yoon,
Jiwoong Sohn, Donghee Choi, and Jaewoo Kang.
2024. Small language models learn enhanced reasoning skills from medical textbooks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.00376.

Maciej Besta, Robert Gerstenberger, Emanuel Peter,
Marc Fischer, Michał Podstawski, Claude Barthels,
Gustavo Alonso, and Torsten Hoefler. 2023. Demystifying graph databases: Analysis and taxonomy of
data organization, system designs, and graph queries.
ACM Computing Surveys, 56(2):1–40.

Jinhyuk Lee, Wonjin Yoon, Sungdong Kim, Donghyeon
Kim, Sunkyu Kim, Chan Ho So, and Jaewoo Kang.
2020. Biobert: a pre-trained biomedical language
representation model for biomedical text mining.
Bioinformatics, 36(4):1234–1240.

Zeming Chen, Alejandro Hernández Cano, Angelika
Romanou, Antoine Bonnet, Kyle Matoba, Francesco
Salvi, Matteo Pagliardini, Simin Fan, Andreas Köpf,
Amirkeivan Mohtashami, et al. 2023. Meditron-70b:
Scaling medical pretraining for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16079.

Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio
Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel, et al. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation
for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:9459–9474.

9

Valentin Liévin, Christoffer Egeberg Hother, Andreas Geert Motzfeldt, and Ole Winther. 2024. Can
large language models reason about medical questions? Patterns, 5(3).

Syed Abdul Gaffar Shakhadri, Kruthika KR, and Rakshit Aralimatti. 2024. Shakti: A 2.5 billion parameter small language model optimized for edge
ai and low-resource environments. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.11331.

Valentin Liévin, Andreas Geert Motzfeldt, Ida Riis
Jensen, and Ole Winther. 2023. Variational opendomain question answering. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 20950–20977.
PMLR.

Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales,
Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl,
et al. 2022. Large language models encode clinical
knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13138.

Jialin Liu, Changyu Wang, and Siru Liu. 2023. Utility
of chatgpt in clinical practice. Journal of Medical
Internet Research, 25:e48568.

Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mahdavi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales,
Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl,
et al. 2023. Large language models encode clinical
knowledge. Nature, 620(7972):172–180.

Yizhen Luo, Jiahuan Zhang, Siqi Fan, Kai Yang,
Yushuai Wu, Mu Qiao, and Zaiqing Nie. 2023.
Biomedgpt: Open multimodal generative pre-trained
transformer for biomedicine.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.09442.

Karan Singhal, Tao Tu, Juraj Gottweis, Rory Sayres,
Ellery Wulczyn, Mohamed Amin, Le Hou, Kevin
Clark, Stephen R Pfohl, Heather Cole-Lewis, et al.
2025. Toward expert-level medical question answering with large language models. Nature Medicine,
pages 1–8.

Zabir Al Nazi and Wei Peng. 2024. Large language
models in healthcare and medical domain: A review.
In Informatics, volume 11, page 57. MDPI.
Harsha Nori, Yin Tat Lee, Sheng Zhang, Dean Carignan, Richard Edgar, Nicolo Fusi, Nicholas King,
Jonathan Larson, Yuanzhi Li, Weishung Liu, et al.
2023. Can generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning? case study in medicine.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16452.

Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar
Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. Interleaving retrieval with chain-of-thought reasoning for
knowledge-intensive multi-step questions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2212.10509.
Peng Xia, Kangyu Zhu, Haoran Li, Tianze Wang, Weijia Shi, Sheng Wang, Linjun Zhang, James Zou,
and Huaxiu Yao. 2024. Mmed-rag: Versatile multimodal rag system for medical vision language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13085.

Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. 2022a. Medmcqa: A large-scale
multi-subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering. In Proceedings of the Conference on Health, Inference, and Learning, volume
174 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
pages 248–260. PMLR.

Rui Yang, Haoran Liu, Edison Marrese-Taylor,
Qingcheng Zeng, Yu He Ke, Wanxin Li, Lechao
Cheng, Qingyu Chen, James Caverlee, Yutaka
Matsuo, et al. 2024. Kg-rank: Enhancing large
language models for medical qa with knowledge
graphs and ranking techniques. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.05881.

Ankit Pal, Logesh Kumar Umapathi, and Malaikannan Sankarasubbu. 2022b. Medmcqa: A large-scale
multi-subject multi-choice dataset for medical domain question answering. In Conference on health,
inference, and learning, pages 248–260. PMLR.

Huizi Yu, Lizhou Fan, Lingyao Li, Jiayan Zhou, Zihui
Ma, Lu Xian, Wenyue Hua, Sijia He, Mingyu Jin,
Yongfeng Zhang, et al. 2024. Large language models in biomedical and health informatics: A review
with bibliometric analysis. Journal of Healthcare
Informatics Research, pages 1–54.

Mohammad Reza Rezaei and Adji Bousso Dieng. 2025.
Vendi-rag: Adaptively trading-off diversity and quality significantly improves retrieval augmented generation with llms. Preprint, arXiv:2502.11228.
Omid Rohanian, Mohammadmahdi Nouriborji,
Samaneh Kouchaki, Farhad Nooralahzadeh, Lei
Clifton, and David A Clifton. 2024. Exploring the
effectiveness of instruction tuning in biomedical
language processing.
Artificial intelligence in
medicine, 158:103007.

Xuejiao Zhao, Siyan Liu, Su-Yin Yang, and Chunyan Miao. 2025. Medrag: Enhancing retrievalaugmented generation with knowledge graph-elicited
reasoning for healthcare copilot. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.04413.

Khaled Saab, Tao Tu, Wei-Hung Weng, Ryutaro Tanno,
David Stutz, Ellery Wulczyn, Fan Zhang, Tim
Strother, Chunjong Park, Elahe Vedadi, et al. 2024.
Capabilities of gemini models in medicine. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.18416.

Hongjian Zhou, Fenglin Liu, Boyang Gu, Xinyu Zou,
Jinfa Huang, Jinge Wu, Yiru Li, Sam S Chen, Peilin
Zhou, Junling Liu, et al. 2023. A survey of large
language models in medicine: Progress, application,
and challenge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.05112.

Diego Sanmartin. 2024. Kg-rag: Bridging the gap
between knowledge and creativity. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.12035.

10

A

Confidence Scoring for the
Relationships in the MKG

8.5/10 for the clarity and precision of node summaries. Confidence scores generally aligned well
with the LLMs’s assessments, as illustrated in Tables 5 and 6, which highlight strong relationships
across domains such as ophthalmology, cardiovascular treatments, and dermatology.
In the second phase, blind testing was conducted
to evaluate usability and human-readability. Expert
LLMs were tasked with answering complex medical queries requiring multi-hop reasoning, such
as managing comorbidities or determining multidrug treatment protocols. As shown in Table 5,
relationships such as the co-usage of Ketotifen and
Fluorometholone for allergic conjunctivitis or Labetalol and Nitroglycerin for acute hypertension
demonstrated the MKG’s ability to model clinically relevant associations effectively. The LLMs
achieved a 89% accuracy rate in these test scenarios. Additionally, the LLMs rated the MKG 9.4/10
for interpretability and usability, underscoring its
strength in visually and contextually representing
complex medical relationships.
To further ensure the clinical relevance and practical applicability of the MKG, medical experts,
including practicing physicians and clinical researchers, were involved in evaluating the generated relationships and summaries. Unlike LLMs,
medical experts provided qualitative assessments,
identifying potential discrepancies, overlooked nuances, and contextual dependencies that automated
models might miss. The medical experts particularly assessed:

A confidence score, sij , is assigned to each inferred
relationship, reflecting its strength and relevance.
The scoring criteria are as follows:
• 10: The target is directly and strongly related to the item, with clear, unambiguous
relevance.
• 7-9: The target is moderately to highly relevant to the item but may have some ambiguity
or indirect association.
• 4-6: The target has some relevance to the item
but is weak or only tangentially related.
• 1-3: The target has minimal or no meaningful
connection to the item.

B

Evaluating the Accuracy and
Robustness of the Medical Knowledge
Graph

The quality and reliability of the dynamically generated MKG are critical for its effectiveness in
enhancing medical QA systems. To validate the
accuracy, robustness, and usability of the MKG,
a structured evaluation involving expert LLMs in
the medical domain, such as GPT medical model,
was conducted. This section outlines the methodology used to evaluate the MKG, emphasizing interpretability, clinical relevance, and robustness in
real-world applications. Additionally, the role of
medical experts in verifying the accuracy and applicability of the MKG is discussed, underscoring
the necessity of human expertise in validating AIdriven medical knowledge representations.
To assess accuracy and robustness, a two-phase
evaluation process was employed. In the first phase,
a group of expert LLMs specialists in medical domains reviewed a subset of the MKG, including
dynamically generated nodes, relationships, confidence scores, and summaries for various medical
queries. They evaluated the accuracy of medical
terms and concepts, the relevance of relationships
between nodes, the reliability of node summaries,
and the alignment of confidence scores with the perceived strength and reliability of the connections.
Each LLM independently rated the graph components on a scale of 1 to 10. The results showed
an average accuracy score of 8.9/10 for node identification, 8.8/10 for relationship relevance, and

1. The correctness and completeness of medical
relationships, ensuring they align with established clinical knowledge and best practices.
2. The validity of multi-hop reasoning paths, verifying whether inferred relationships reflected
logical clinical decision-making processes.
3. The utility of the MKG in real-world medical
applications, particularly in aiding diagnostic
and treatment decision-making.
The feedback from medical experts was instrumental in refining the graph, addressing inconsistencies, and enhancing the confidence scores to better reflect real-world medical reliability. Notably,
medical expert ratings aligned well with LLM evaluations but provided deeper insights into the contextual limitations of the graph. For example, while
LLMs accurately linked Diltiazem and Nitroglycerin in cardiovascular treatment, medical experts
11

D

highlighted additional considerations such as contraindications in specific patient populations, which
were subsequently incorporated into the MKG.

This section outlines the pipeline for dataset ingestion and vector database creation for efficient
medical question-answering. The process involves
document chunking, embedding generation, and
storage in a vector database to facilitate semantic
retrieval.

The detailed evaluations in Tables 5 and 6 provide further insights into the graph’s performance
across diverse medical domains. For instance, the
accurate representation of relationships between
beta-blockers like Labetalol and Propranolol or
the integration of treatments such as Diltiazem
and Nitroglycerin for cardiovascular care highlight
the MKG’s capacity to support intricate clinical
decision-making.

D.1

Dataset Processing and Chunking

The dataset, sourced from medical textbooks in
the MEDQA benchmark, is provided in plain text
format. Each document is segmented into smaller
chunks with a maximum size of 512 tokens and a
100-token overlap. This overlap ensures context
preservation across chunk boundaries, supporting
multi-hop reasoning for long documents.

These results confirm that the MKG is both
human-readable and usable by advanced LLMs,
making it an invaluable tool for medical QA and
decision-making. The graph’s structured format,
enriched with confidence scores and summaries,
ensures a clear and interpretable representation of
medical knowledge while enhancing the efficiency
and accuracy of QA systems in addressing realworld medical scenarios. Moreover, the involvement of medical experts in the evaluation process
enhances the credibility of the MKG, ensuring that
AI-driven insights align with clinical expertise and
practical healthcare applications.

C

Implementation Details for Dataset
Ingestion and Vector Database

D.2

Embedding Model and Vector Storage

The system utilizes the SentenceTransformer
model, specifically all-mpnet-base-v2, for generating dense vector representations of text chunks
and queries. To optimize storage and retrieval,
the embeddings are indexed in the Chroma vector
database. Metadata, such as document filenames
and chunk IDs, is also stored to maintain document
traceability.

QA Samples with reasoning from
MEDQA benchmark

D.3

This section presents a set of QA samples demonstrating the reasoning paths generated by our proposed AMG-RAG model when applied to the
MEDQA dataset. These examples highlight how
the model retrieves relevant content, structures key
information, and formulates reasoning to guide answer selection.

Batch Processing and Vector Database
Population

To manage memory efficiently during ingestion,
document chunks are processed in batches of up to
10,000. This ensures a smooth ingestion pipeline
while preventing memory overflow. Each processed file is logged to avoid redundant computations, and error handling mechanisms are in place
to manage failed processing attempts.

Table 7 provides an example of how the model
processes a clinical case question related to the
management of acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
The search items retrieved for possible answer
choices (e.g., Nifedipine, Enoxaparin, Clopidogrel,
Spironolactone, Propranolol) are accompanied by
key content excerpts relevant to their roles in ACS
treatment. Additionally, the reasoning pathways illustrate how the model synthesizes evidence-based
knowledge to justify the selection of the correct
answer (Clopidogrel), while also explaining why
the alternative options are not suitable. Additional
examples are also provided in Tables 8, 9, and 10

D.4

Query Answering Workflow

For retrieval, user queries (e.g., "What are the symptoms of drug-induced diabetes?") are embedded
using the all-mpnet-base-v2 model. The topranked relevant chunks are retrieved based on their
semantic similarity to the query using Chroma’s
similarity search mechanism. The system retrieves
the top k relevant passages, which can be further
processed in downstream QA models.
D.5

Key Configuration Details

The system is configured with the following parameters:
12

Source Node

Relationship Type

Target Node

LLM Expert Analysis

Blind Analysis

Botulism

Directly related as it is
the target concept.

Myasthenia
gravis

Rated 9.2/10 for relevance and clinical
importance, considered
highly accurate.

Levodopa

Levodopa is a primary
treatment for Parkinson’s disease.

Parkinson’s disease

Evaluated as highly reliable (9.6/10) for summarizing medical treatments and relationships.

Zidovudine

Zidovudine is an antiviral drug used for HIV
treatment.

HIV/AIDS

Experts rated it 9.4/10
for interpretability, highlighting the clear representation of the relationship.
Rated 9.2/10 for relevance to nucleic acid
metabolism and DNA
replication.

Demonstrated effective
multi-hop reasoning
with a 92% accuracy
in identifying related
conditions.
Increases
accuracy
by 24% in answering
queries about Parkinson’s treatments and
comorbidities.
Provided contextually
accurate responses regarding drug interactions and side effects in
queries.
Demonstrated high accuracy in answering
multi-hop queries related to DNA synthesis
pathways.
Increases the accuracy
by 20% in scenarios involving cellular structure interactions.
Accurate in providing
causal explanations for
oxidative stress and
DNA cross-linking.
Effective in multi-hop
reasoning for renal
damage-related queries,
achieving 91% accuracy.

Inhibition
thymidine
synthesis

of

Cross-linking of DNA
is directly related to
thymidine synthesis as
both involve nucleic
acid metabolism.
Hyperstabilization Cross-linking of DNA
of microtubules can be related to the
stabilization of microtubules.
Generation of Free radicals can lead
free radicals
to oxidative damage, affecting DNA integrity
and function.
Renal papillary Allergic
interstitial
necrosis
nephritis can lead to
renal damage.

Cross-linking
of DNA

Cross-linking
of DNA
Cross-linking
of DNA
Allergic interstitial nephritis

Rated 9.0/10 for highlighting structural modifications affecting cellular functions.
Rated 8.5/10 for its relevance to oxidative stress
and DNA damage mechanisms.
Rated 9.0/10 for explaining the clinical progression of renal complications.

Medical Expert Analysis
Rated 9.5/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.
Rated 10/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.
Rated 10/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.
Rated 9/10 for relevance
and accuracy, considered accurate.
Rated 8/10 for moderated relevance.
Rated 7.5/10 for relevance.
Rated 10/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Table 5: Examples from the Medical Knowledge Graph (MKG) with Expert and Blind Analysis (Part 1)

• Embedding Model: all-mpnet-base-v2
from SentenceTransformer.

Graph databases, like Neo4j, address this challenge
by efficiently modeling and processing complex,
evolving data structures using nodes, relationships,
and properties (Besta et al., 2023).
Neo4j, an open-source NoSQL graph database,
enables constant-time traversals by explicitly storing relationships, making it ideal for large-scale
applications such as social networks, recommendation systems, and biomedical research. Unlike
relational models, Neo4j avoids costly table joins
and optimizes deep relationship queries, enhancing
scalability and performance (Besta et al., 2023).
Neo4j’s architecture is centered around the property graph model, which includes(Huang and Dong,
2013):

• Vector Database: Chroma, stored persistently on disk for reusability.
• Chunk Size: 512 tokens per chunk, with a
100-token overlap for contextual consistency.
• Batch Size: Up to 10,000 chunks per batch to
optimize ingestion efficiency.
D.6

Implementation and System Execution

The ingestion and query process is implemented using Python, leveraging sentence-transformers
for embeddings and Chroma for vector storage. The
ingestion pipeline reads and processes text files,
splits them into chunks, generates embeddings, and
stores them efficiently in the vector database. The
querying process retrieves the top k most relevant
text chunks to respond to user queries.

E

Components Definition

E.1

Neo4j

• Nodes: Entities representing data points.
• Relationships: Directed, named connections
between nodes that define how entities are
related.
• Properties: Key-value pairs associated with
both nodes and relationships, providing additional metadata.

As data complexity increases, traditional relational databases struggle with highly interconnected datasets where relationships are crucial.

This model allows for intuitive representation
of complex data structures and supports efficient
13

Source Node
Ketotifen
drops

eye

Relationship Type

Ketotifen eye drops
are
antihistamines
used for allergic conjunctivitis, which may
be used alongside
Fluorometholone for
managing eye allergies.
Ketotifen eye Latanoprost eye drops
drops
are used to lower intraocular pressure in
glaucoma, while Ketotifen treats allergic conjunctivitis.
Diltiazem
Nitroglycerin is relevant
in discussions of cardiovascular treatments
alongside Diltiazem.
Labetalol
Labetalol is closely related to Propranolol,
both managing hypertension.
Nitroglycerin
Nitroglycerin and Labetalol are often used
in conjunction for managing hypertension and
heart conditions.
Nitroglycerin
Nitroglycerin is often
used with Propranolol
in managing cardiovascular conditions like hypertension and angina.
Fluorometholone Fluorometholone
eye drops
eye drops are corticosteroids that treat
inflammation, complementing Ketotifen for
allergic conjunctivitis.
Lanolin
Lanolin is used for
skin care, particularly
for sore nipples during
breastfeeding.

Target Node

LLM Expert Analysis

Blind Analysis

Medical Expert Analysis
Rated 10/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Fluorometholone Rated 9.2/10 for releeye drops
vance in managing allergic conjunctivitis.

Demonstrated 93% accuracy in multi-hop reasoning for ophthalmological conditions.

Latanoprost eye
drops

Rated 9.0/10 for distinct yet complementary
roles in ophthalmology.

Effective in identifying
separate ophthalmic applications with 92% accuracy.

Rated 10/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Nitroglycerin

Rated 8.8/10 for contextual relevance to cardiovascular management.

Increases the accuracy
for
treatment-based
queries by 20%.

Rated 9.5/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Propranolol

Rated 9.5/10 for direct
relevance in cardiovascular treatment protocols.
Rated 8.7/10 for strong
relevance in acute hypertension protocols.

Highly interpretable responses for hypertension management, with
95% accuracy.
Supported
effective
multi-drug
therapy
reasoning with 90%
accuracy.

Rated 10/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Rated 9.0/10 for its importance in cardiovascular multi-drug therapy.

Rated 10/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Rated 8.8/10 for their
combined application in
managing inflammation
and allergies.

Demonstrated robust
performance in connecting treatment protocols,
with 93% query accuracy.
Improved query relevance for multi-drug
therapy in eye care by
19%.

Fluorometholone Rated
8.5/10
for
eye drops
highlighting
nonoverlapping yet clinically useful contexts.

Demonstrated effective
differentiation of clinical uses with high interpretability.

Rated 9/10 for relevance
and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Labetalol

Propranolol

Ketotifen
drops

eye

Rated 9/10 for relevance
and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Rated 9.5/10 for relevance and accuracy, considered highly accurate.

Table 6: Examples from the Medical Knowledge Graph (MKG) with Expert and Blind Analysis (Part 2)

querying and analysis. The system’s internal mechanisms facilitate rapid traversal of relationships, enabling swift query responses even in large datasets
(Huang and Dong, 2013).

prising approximately 76,681 nodes and 354,299
edges. These nodes encompass a comprehensive
range of medical entities including diseases, symptoms, treatments, drugs, anatomical structures, and
clinical findings, all interconnected through semantically meaningful, typed relationships. This substantial scale not only reflects the intricate nature
of medical knowledge but also enables more nuanced, multi-hop reasoning capabilities across diverse medical queries. The graph’s architecture allows for dynamic expansion and refinement, ensuring that the knowledge representation remains both
comprehensive and adaptable to emerging medical
research and understanding.

Does Neo4j-Based Storage scale well? Neo4j’s
scalability for our medical knowledge graph storage is strategically robust, offering several key
advantages for large-scale, relationship-intensive
medical data. Its graph-based architecture is
particularly well-suited for handling highly interconnected medical knowledge networks, supporting horizontal scaling that enables efficient
performance even as the knowledge base grows.
The cloud-based accessibility further enhances the
framework’s flexibility, allowing seamless knowledge sharing and distributed access without local
storage constraints.

F

How large were the knowledge graphs? Our automatically constructed medical knowledge graphs
demonstrate significant complexity and depth, com14

Additional Results

Search Item/ Ques- Key Content Highlighted
tion Options
Nifedipine
Not typically used for
acute coronary syndrome
(ACS). Associated with reflex tachycardia.
Enoxaparin

Clopidogrel

Spironolactone

Propranolol

Reasoning Guiding the
Answer
Nifedipine is a calcium
channel blocker effective
for hypertension but does
not address the antiplatelet
needs of ACS patients.
Used for anticoagulation Enoxaparin is not continin ACS but mainly during ued after discharge when
hospitalization.
aspirin and another antiplatelet drug are prescribed.
Standard for dual an- Clopidogrel complements
tiplatelet therapy (DAPT) aspirin in preventing
in ACS, especially post- thrombotic events postpercutaneous coronary in- angioplasty. Its use is
tervention (PCI).
supported by evidencebased guidelines.
Useful in heart failure or This patient’s EF is 58%,
reduced ejection fraction so spironolactone is not
but not indicated for ACS necessary. Focus should
management when EF is be on antiplatelet therapy.
normal.
Effective for reducing my- While beneficial for stressocardial oxygen demand related heart issues, it
but not part of standard does not address thromDAPT.
botic risks in ACS management.

Table 7: Examples of Summary of search items for the question "A 65-year-old man is brought to the emergency
department 30 minutes after the onset of acute chest pain. He has hypertension and asthma. Current medications
include atorvastatin, lisinopril, and an albuterol inhaler. He appears pale and diaphoretic. His pulse is 114/min, and
blood pressure is 130/88 mm Hg. An ECG shows ST-segment depressions in leads II, III, and aVF. Laboratory
studies show an increased serum troponin T concentration. The patient is treated for acute coronary syndrome and
undergoes percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. At the time of discharge, echocardiography shows a left
ventricular ejection fraction of 58%. In addition to aspirin, which of the following drugs should be added to this
patient’s medication regimen?" and Their Influence on the Correct Answer (Clopidogrel) and the reasoning paths

15

Search Item/ Question Options
A history of stroke
or venous thromboembolism

Key Content Highlighted

Current tobacco
use

Increases cardiovascular
risk with hormonal contraceptives but not with copper IUDs.

Active
or
recurrent
pelvic
inflammatory
disease (PID)
Past medical history of breast cancer

Direct contraindication for
IUD placement due to the
risk of exacerbating infection and complications.
Contraindicates hormonal
contraceptives, but copper
IUDs are considered safe.

Contraindicated for hormonal contraceptives due
to increased risk of thrombosis.

Known liver neo- Contraindicates hormonal
plasm
contraceptives but not copper IUDs.

Reasoning Guiding the
Answer
Copper IUDs do not carry
the same thrombotic risk,
making this option irrelevant for contraindication
in IUD placement.
Tobacco use does not
contraindicate IUD placement, though it may influence other contraceptive
choices.
Insertion of an IUD can
worsen active PID, leading to infertility or other
severe complications.
This option does not contraindicate copper IUD
placement, as it is nonhormonal and unrelated to
breast cancer.
Copper IUDs are safe for
patients with liver neoplasms as they are free of
systemic hormones.

Table 8: Examples of Summary of Search Items for the Question "A 37-year-old-woman presents to her primary
care physician requesting a new form of birth control. She has been utilizing oral contraceptive pills (OCPs) for
the past 8 years, but asks to switch to an intrauterine device (IUD). Her vital signs are: blood pressure 118/78
mm Hg, pulse 73/min and respiratory rate 16/min. She is afebrile. Physical examination is within normal limits.
Which of the following past medical history statements would make copper IUD placement contraindicated in this
patient?" and Their Influence on the Correct Answer (Active or recurrent pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)) and
the Reasoning Paths

16

Search Item/ Ques- Key Content Highlighted
tion Options
Dementia
Typically presents as a
gradual decline in cognitive function.
Alcohol
drawal

with- Requires significant and
sustained alcohol use to
cause withdrawal symptoms.

Opioid
tion

intoxica- Oxycodone can cause sedation and confusion, but
stable vital signs and lack
of severe respiratory depression are inconsistent.
Delirium
Characterized by acute
changes in attention and
cognition with fluctuating
levels of consciousness.
Urinary tract in- Confusion in elderly pafection (UTI)
tients can result from
UTIs, but a normal urine
dipstick test does not support this.

Reasoning Guiding the
Answer
The sudden onset of symptoms after surgery and
acute confusion makes dementia less likely.
The patient’s weekly consumption of one to two
glasses of wine is insufficient to support this diagnosis.
While oxycodone use is
relevant, the observed fluctuating agitation and impulsivity are more consistent with delirium.
The patient’s recent
surgery, medication use,
and fluctuating symptoms
align strongly with a
diagnosis of delirium.
The absence of urinary
findings on examination
makes UTI less likely as
the cause of symptoms.

Table 9: Examples of Search Items for the Question: "Six days after undergoing surgical repair of a hip fracture, a
79-year-old woman presents with agitation and confusion. Which of the following is the most likely cause of her
current condition?" and Their Influence on the Correct Answer (Delirium) and the Reasoning Paths.

17

Search Item/ Ques- Key Content Highlighted
tion Options
Primary sperma- Nondisjunction events durtocyte
ing meiosis I often occur
at this stage, leading to
chromosomal abnormalities.
Secondary sper- Meiosis II occurs here, dimatocyte
viding chromosomes into
haploid cells, but errors at
this stage are less likely to
lead to 47,XXY.
Spermatid
Spermatids are postmeiotic cells where
genetic material is already
finalized.
Spermatogonium
Errors here affect the
germline but are less likely
to cause specific meiotic
nondisjunction errors.
Spermatozoon

These are fully mature
sperm cells that inherit
abnormalities from earlier
stages.

Reasoning Guiding the
Answer
Klinefelter
syndrome
(47,XXY) is typically due
to nondisjunction during
meiosis, specifically at
this stage.
The chromosomal abnormality associated with
Klinefelter syndrome usually arises before this
stage.
Errors at this stage would
not result in a cytogenetic
abnormality like 47,XXY.
While germline mutations
can occur, meiotic nondisjunction leading to Klinefelter syndrome occurs
later.
By this stage, chromosomal errors have already
been established.

Table 10: Examples of Search Items for the Question: "A 29-year-old man with infertility, tall stature, gynecomastia,
small testes, and an elevated estradiol:testosterone ratio is evaluated. Genetic studies reveal a cytogenetic abnormality
inherited from the father. At which stage of spermatogenesis did this error most likely occur?" and Their Influence
on the Correct Answer (Primary spermatocyte) and the Reasoning Paths.
Example 1

Question: A 29-year-old man presents with infertility. He has been trying to conceive for over 2 years. His
wife has no fertility issues. Exam shows tall stature, long limbs, sparse body hair, gynecomastia, and small
testes. Labs reveal elevated FSH and a high estradiol:testosterone ratio. Cytogenetic analysis indicates a
chromosomal abnormality. If inherited from the father, during which stage of spermatogenesis did this error
most likely occur?
Choices: A: Primary spermatocyte, B: Secondary spermatocyte, C: Spermatid, D: Spermatogonium, E:
Spermatozoon
Answer: A (Primary spermatocyte)
Reasoning: This corresponds to an error in meiosis I during the father’s spermatogenesis, consistent with
Klinefelter syndrome due to paternal nondisjunction.
Retrieved Papers: 1) Black et al., *The Genetic Landscape of Male Factor Infertility*, Uro, 2025. 2) Niyaz
et al., *Chromosome Disorders in Sperm Anomalies*, 2025. 3) Leslie et al., *MNS1 variant and Male
Infertility*, EJHG, 2020.

Example 2

Question: A 23-year-old woman is referred for genetic counseling after her brother is diagnosed with
hereditary hemochromatosis. She is asymptomatic and her labs are normal. Which gene mutation is most
consistent with hereditary hemochromatosis?
Choices: A: BCR-ABL, B: BRCA, C: FA, D: HFE, E: WAS
Answer: D (HFE gene)
Reasoning: Most hereditary hemochromatosis cases in Northern European populations are caused by HFE
mutations (C282Y, H63D). Even asymptomatic individuals with normal iron studies should be screened if
they have an affected first-degree relative.
Retrieved Papers: 1) Delatycki & Allen, *Population Screening for HH*, Genes, 2024. 2) Lou et al., *Utility
of Iron Indices in HH Genotyping*, Clin. Biochem., 2025. 3) Lucas et al., *HFE Genotypes and Outcomes*,
BMJ Open, 2024.

Table 11: Examples of AMG-RAG-generated answers with structured reasoning and citation-based grounding for
clinical QA.

18

